# Program Synthesis Papers 速览

> Papers Quick View / Program Synthesis

## 【JLP99】Inductive Synthesis of Recursive Logic Programs: Achievements and Prospects 

> JLP / 1999
>
> inductive inference / inductive logic programming / recursion / schemas

The inductive synthesis of recursive logic programs from incomplete information such as I/O examples, is a challenging subfield both of **ILP (Inductive Logic Programming)** and of the synthesis (in general) of logic programs from formal specifications.

We first overview ... focusing on the techniques specifically for the **inductive synthesis of recursive logic programs**, also discussing a few **general ILP techniques that can also induce non-recursive hypotheses**. Then we analyse the prospects of these techniques.

结论：

- about inductive synthesis of recursive (logic) programs:
- challenging的原因：recursive programs are particularly delicate mathematical objects that must be designed with utmost care
- 为什么重要：recursive programs (for certain predicates) are sometimes the only way to complete the induction of a finite hypothesis (involving these predicates).
- reliability和speed进展缓慢，required inputs正在下降，不同的方法数目巨大。
- 讨论了可能应用：knowledge discovery and software engineering (or rather: program-mining)
- 不同的应用需要completely different settings，这些不同点应该在将来的技术中充分考虑。

## 【JofML06】 Inductive Synthesis of Functional Programs: An Explanation Based Generalization Approach

> Journal of Machine Learning Research / 2006
>
> inductive program synthesis / inductive functional programming / explanation based generalization / recursive program schemes

an approach to the inductive synthesis of recursive equations from I/O examples. 基于函数式Lisp的经典two-step approach:

- 第一阶段：IO examples根据一个datatype theory重写为traces，解释outputs如何从inputs产生；这些traces能被集成进一个conditional expression，表示一个non-recursive program。
- 第二阶段：初始的program term被generalized into recursive equations，通过搜索term中的syntax模式。

本文工作拓展了这一classical work：

- 能够在一个synthesizing step内induce到一组recursive equations
- equations能够包含超过一个recursive call
- 额外需要的参数会被自动引入

Conclusion:

- 一种EBG approach，从IO examples中inducing能够表示函数式程序的sets of recursive equations
- 还没做的：knowledge about further datatypes such as trees and natural numbers，超过一个参数，使用用户定义或之前得到的functions
- 限制：restriction to structural problems，因为计算traces是deterministically而不是搜索。列表排序就无法做。

## 【SYNASC12】 Synthesis From Examples: Interaction Models and Algorithms

> Invited Talk Paper / 2012 / Sumit Gulwani
>
> Program Synthesis, Inductive Synthesis, End User Programming, Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Domain Specific Languages, Programming By Example

Synthesis from examples involves addressing two key technical challenges:

- design of a UI model to deal with the **ambiguity** 
- design of an search algorithm:
  - based on SAT/SMT solvers (formal methods community), 
  - version space algebras (machine learning community), 
  - and A\*-style goal-directed heuristics (AI community).

本文介绍一些有效的UI model和算法（synthesis from examples)，讨论一些应用领域的的synthesizer (bit-vector, spreadsheet, geometry, algebraic identities, repetitive drawings, mathematical terms).

We believe that the most interesting applications of the synthesis technology can be in the areas of **end-user programming**, and **intelligent tutoring systems**. It remains an open research problem to **design intelligent multi-modal interfaces** that can take examples, natural language, speech, touch, etc. as input.

## 【CAV13】Recursive Program Synthesis

> CAV / 2013 / Aws Albarghou, Sumit Gulwani

本文present了ESCHER，一个通用高效的算法，与用户交互IO examples，合成recursive programs。ESCHER is parameterized by the components（program中能够使用的指令）。ESCHER使用了一种novel search strategy利用特殊的数据结构来推理conditionals并合成recursive procedures。经过实验，能够合成整数、列表、树相关程序，且比一个SAT-based synthesizer SKETCH性能要好。

结论：

- technical side，未来可以extend ESCHER来合成loops；为了提升其synthesize constants的能力，可以考虑与SMT-based search结合（check if there is a solution that uses synthesized constants within n steps for a given input-output example）
- application side，applicability of ESCHER as an intelligent tutoring system

## 【PLDI14】Test-Driven Synthesis

> PLDI / 2014 / Sumit Gulwani

提出一个program synthesizer which can be parameterized by an arbitrary DSL that may contain conditionals and loops and therefore is able to synthesize programs in any domain. 用户提供一列越来越复杂的IO examples，以及expert-written DSL definition。展示了一些应用（字符串，XML，table的变换）。

First, we developed a novel iterative synthesis technique inspired by test-driven development，IO examples一次读取一个，随着程序is refined。

Second, the DSL allows our system to take an efficient component-based approach to enumerating possible programs.

结论：

advances the state-of-the-art in component based synthesis which has been **restricted to synthesis of straight line code fragments** over a given set of components. 实的能够包含conditionals和loops。未来工作准备研究function inverses in the DSL(似乎就是FlashMeta)，扩展control flow structures.

## 【PLDI15】Type-and-Example-Directed Program Synthesis

> PLDI / 2015
>
> Functional Programming, Proof Search, Program Synthesis, Type Theory

presents an algorithm for synthesizing **recursive functions that process algebraic datatypes.** exploit both **type information** and **I/O examples** to prune the search space. uses **refinement trees**, a data structure that succinctly represents constraints on the shape of generated code.

相关工作和结论：

- **Proof- and Type-theoretic Synthesis**
  - At its core, λsyn is a proof theory-inspired synthesis algorithm, not the first to **apply proof theory for program synthesis**. Some of the earliest program synthesis work was rooted in **resolution-based theorem proving, using axiomatic specifications** (Green 1969) or **even input–output examples** (Summers 1976). Recent systems explored enumerative, rather than deductive approaches. MagicHaskeller [2012] **enumerates programs using a set of logical rules** and permitted components, caching them for later lookup. It is fast, but **does not generate programs that branch**. Igor2 (Kitzelmann 2010) attempt to combine the best of the **deductive and enumerative** worlds.
  - take advantage of the specifications that types provide. **InSynth** is particularly noteworthy because it also adapts the **type inhabitation problem for synthesis**. InSynth performs a backwards-style proof search similar to MYTH, But no IO examples.
- **Functional-Recursive Program Synthesis**
  - Most notable are Escher (Albarghouthi et al. 2013) and Leon (Kneuss et al. 2013). MYTH can be thought of as an evolution of Escher. Escher builds terms from the bottom-up whereas **MYTH builds terms top-down**.
  - Leon focuses on properties, rather than concrete examples, discharged via **counterexample guided inductive synthesis** (CEGIS) (Solar-Lezama 2008) and
    a SMT solver (Barrett et al. 2008).
  - a solver-based approach is largely orthogonal to our type-directed synthesis procedure. Solver-based algorithms generally **bubble up constraints until they can be collected** and discharged globally.
- Conclusion
  - λsyn combines foundational techniques from proof theory with ideas from modern example-driven program synthesis. prototype, MYTH, show that type-directed program synthesis is a viable approach to synthesis that takes advantage of the rich structure present in typed, functional programming languages.

## 【TACAS17】Scaling Enumerative Program Synthesis via Divide and Conquer

> TACAS / 2017

the Syntax- Guided Synthesis (SyGuS) problem is to find an expression that satisfies
both the syntactic and semantic constraints: **semantic constraint** specified by a logical formula, a **syntactic constraint** specified by a context-free grammar.

An **enumerative approach** to solve this problem is to **systematically generate all expressions from the syntactic space** with some **pruning**. performs well on small to medium sized benchmarks.

Our approach: a **divide-and-conquer** approach by **separately enumerating** (a) smaller expressions that are **correct on subsets** of inputs, and (b) predicates that **distinguish these subsets**. expressions and predicates are then combined using decision trees (multi-label decision tree learning problem). We propose a novel technique of associating a probability distribution over the set of labels that a sample can be labeled with. use standard **information-gain based heuristics** to learn compact decision trees.

prototype implementation **eusolver**, placed first in the general track and the programming-by-examples track (2016).

总结:

- Most synthesis algorithms proposed in recent literature can be viewed as an instantiation of CEGIS (counterexample guided inductive synthesis).
- Synthesis of recursive programs and data structure manipulating code has also been studied extensively
  - Recursive Program Synthesis (CAV 2013)
  - Synthesis Modulo Recursive Functions (OOPSLA 2013)
  - Comfusy: A Tool for Complete Functional Synthesis (CAV 2010)
- SyGuS first: Enumerative Search, Stochastic Search, Symbolic Search
- 本文：The algorithm overcomes the shortcomings of a basic enumerative algorithm by using enumeration to only learn small expressions which are correct on subsets of the inputs. These expressions are then used to form a conditional expression using Boolean combinations of enumerated predicates using decision trees.

## 【ICLR17】Neuro-Symbolic Program Synthesis

> ICLR / 2017

Recent years have seen the proposal of a number of neural architectures for the problem of Program Induction. Given a set of input-output examples, these architectures are able to learn mappings that generalize to new test inputs. But: **computationally expensive and hard to train**, **a model has**
**to be trained for each task**, **hard to interpret or verify the correctness of the learnt mapping**.

In this paper, we propose **Neuro-Symbolic Program Synthesis**. Based on two novel neural modules. The first module, called the **cross correlation I/O network**, given a set of input-output examples, produces a continuous representation of the set of I/O examples. The second module, the **Recursive-**
**Reverse-Recursive Neural Network (R3NN)**, given the continuous representation of the examples, synthesizes a program by incrementally expanding partial programs.

Demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by applying it to the rich and complex domain of regular expression based string transformations.

we took a **supervised-learning approach** here, assuming availability of target programs during training.
In some scenarios, we may only have **access to an oracle** that returns the desired output given an input. In this case, **reinforcement learning** is a promising framework for program synthesis.

## 【CommACM18】Search based program synthesis

>Communications of ACM / 2018 / review articles

- Syntax-guided synthesis formalizes the computational problem of searching for a program expression that meets both syntactic and logical constraints.
- A wide variety of problems, such as programming by examples, program super-optimization, and program repair, naturally map to syntax-guided synthesis. 
- Standardization, benchmark collection, and solver competition have led to significant advances in solution strategies and new applications.
  - The formalization of the SyGuS problem and organization of the annual competition of solvers has been a catalyst for research in search-based program synthesis.
- The categories of benchmarks in which state-of-the-art solvers excel are those with a single function
  invocation, a single function to synthesize, a complete specification, no use of let, and a restricted grammar.

- Programming by examples in **domain specific applications** and **semantics preserving optimization** are already proving to be its interesting applications. Our experience shows that investing in the infrastructure— standardized input formats, collection of benchmarks, opensource prototype solvers, and a competition of solvers—has been vital in advancing the state of the of art. Finally, **improving the scalability of SyGuS solvers is an active area** of current research, and in particular, a promising research direction is to explore **how these solvers can benefit from modern machine learning technology** (see, for example, Devlin et al. for the use of neural networks for learning programs from IO examples).

## 【ICLR18】Towards Synthesizing Complex Programs From Input-Output Examples
> ICLR / 2018

proposing a new class of challenging tasks in the domain of program synthesis from IO examples: **learning a context-free parser** from **pairs of input programs and their parse trees**. three novel techniques: 

- the use of **a non-differentiable machine** is the key to effectively restrict the search space. learns a neural program operating a domain-specific non-differentiable machine.
- **recursion** is the key to achieve generalizability.  bake-in the notion of recursion in the design of our non-differentiable machine.
- **reinforcement learning** is the key to learn **how to operate** the non-differentiable machine.

hard to train the model effectively from a cold boot. We develop a novel two-phase reinforcement learning-based search algorithm to overcome this issue. Neural parsing programs can be learned to achieve 100% test accuracy on test inputs that are 500x longer than the training samples.

## 【PLDI18】Program Synthesis Using Conflict-Driven Learning

> PLDI / 2018

We propose a new **conflict-driven** program synthesis technique that is capable of **learning from past mistakes**.  our synthesis algorithm identifies the root cause of the conflict (with specification) and learns new lemmas that can prevent similar mistakes in the future. we introduce the notion of **equivalence modulo conflict**. We have implemented a general purpose CDCL-style program synthesizer called Neo and evaluate it in two different application domains, namely data wrangling in R and **functional programming over lists**. Neo outperforms two state-of-the-art synthesis tools, Morpheus and DeepCoder, that target these respective domains.

Our synthesis algorithm infers these lemmas by identifying DSL constructs that are equivalent modulo conflict, meaning that **replacing one component with the other results in an another infeasible program**.

## 【POPL18】Program Synthesis Using Abstraction Refinement

> POPL / 2018
>
> Program Synthesis, Abstract Interpretation, Counterexample Guided Abstraction Refinement, Tree Automata

We present a new approach to example-guided program synthesis based on **counterexample-guided abstraction refinement**. Our method uses the abstract semantics of the underlying DSL to find a program P whose abstract behavior satisfies the examples. However, since program P may be **spurious with respect to the concrete semantics**, our approach **iteratively refines the abstraction** until we either find a program that satisfies the examples or prove that no such DSL program exists. many programs have the same input-output behavior in terms of their abstract semantics, this synthesis methodology **significantly reduces the search space compared to existing techniques that use purely concrete semantics**.

we propose a refinement-based synthesis algorithm that uses **abstract finite tree automata (AFTA).** We implement these ideas in a framework called Blaze, which can be instantiated in different domains **by providing a suitable DSL and its corresponding concrete and abstract semantics**. We have used the Blaze framework to build **synthesizers for string and matrix transformations**.

Our results for the **string** domain show that **Blaze compares favorably with FlashFill**, In the context of **matrix manipulations**, we compare **Blaze against Prose**, a state-of-the-art general-purpose VSA-based synthesizer, and show that Blaze
results in a **90x speed-up over Prose**.

Limitations:

- does not support let bindings
- treats λ-abstractions as constants; hence, it may not perform very well for DSLs that encourage heavy use of higher-order combinators.
- requires abstract values to be drawn from a decidable logic

## 【PLDI20】Exact and Approximate Methods for Proving Unrealizability of Syntax-Guided Synthesis Problems

> PLDI / 2020 

We consider the problem of automatically establishing that **a given syntax-guided-synthesis (SyGuS) problem is unrealizable** (i.e., has no solution).

We then present an algorithm for exactly solving the set of equations that result from SyGuS problems over linear integer arithmetic (**LIA**) and LIA with conditionals (**CLIA**), thereby showing that LIA and CLIA SyGuS problems over finitely many examples are decidable.

We implement the proposed technique and algorithms in a tool called nay. nay can prove unrealizability for 70/132 existing SyGuS benchmarks, with running times comparable to those of the state-of-the-art tool nope.

相关工作比较：

- nope, the tool we compare against (can prove unrealizability for non-trivial SyGuS problems), reduces the problem of proving unrealizability to one of **proving unreachability in a recursive nondeterministic program**, and uses off-the-shelf verifiers to solve the unreachability problem. 
- In contrast, the approach presented in this paper gives a characterization of unrealizability in terms of solving a set of equations. Using the **equation-solving framework**, we provided the **first decision procedures for LIA and CLIA** SyGuS problems over examples.

## 【PLDI20】Question Selection for Interactive Program Synthesis

> PLDI / 2020

Selecting the proper question to minimize the rounds of interactions is critical to the performance of interactive program synthesis. We address this question selection problem and propose two algorithms. 

- SampleSy **approximates a state-of-the-art strategy proposed for optimal decision tree** and has a short response time to enable interaction. 
- EpsSy further reduces the rounds of interactions by **approximating SampleSy with a bounded error rate**. 
- To implement the two algorithms, we further propose VSampler, an approach to **sampling programs from a probabilistic context-free grammar based on version space algebra**. The evaluation shows the effectiveness of both algorithms.

结论：

**Staring from the minimax branch strategy**, we design two efficient algorithms SampleSy and EpsSy for two different scenarios: **SampleSy ensures the result to be correct while EpsSy has a bounded error rate.**

## 【PLDI20】Reconciling Enumerative and Deductive Program Synthesis

> PLDI / 2020

enumerative synthesis, deductive synthesis: Neither approach is strictly better than the other: **automated deductive synthesis is usually very efficient but only works for special grammars or applications**; **enumerative synthesis is very generally applicable but limited in scalability.**

We propose a **cooperative synthesis technique** for SyGuS problems CLIA background theory, combining the best of the two worlds. The technique exploits several novel **divide-and-conquer strategies to split** a large synthesis problem to smaller subproblems (solved separately). The technique integrates two synthesis engines: a **pure deductive component** that can efficiently solve some problems, and **a height-based enumeration algorithm** that can handle arbitrary grammar.

Contributions:

- a cooperative synthesis framework that splits a synthesis problem into subproblems which are solved by deduction or enumeration separately

- three novel divide-and-conquer strategies which allows splitting a wide variety of sophisticated synthesis problems

- a height-based enumeration algorithm that splits the search space based on the height of the tree representation of the program and searches for each height symbolically;

- a set of general deductive rules that are powerful enough to solve/simplify many synthesis problems

- the cooperative synthesis technique has been embodied in a SyGuS solver called DryadSynth.

## 【POPL20】Augmented Example-Based Synthesis using Relational Perturbation Properties

> POPL / 2020

Example-based specifications for program synthesis, ambiguous problem. Existing synthesis techniques attempt to address this problem by either **placing a domain-specific syntactic bias** on the hypothesis space or heavily **relying on user feedback** to help resolve ambiguity.

We present a new framework to address the ambiguity/generalizability problem in example-based synthesis. **Permutation invariance:** the program output does not change when the elements of the program input (array) are permuted.

based on two core steps: (1) automatically **augment the set of user-provided examples by applying relational perturbation properties** and (2) use a generic example-based synthesizer to **generate a program consistent with the augmented set of examples**. (in video, talk about hard / soft constraint)

We presented solutions for three user interfaces and demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach in significantly boosting the performance of the **Sketch** synthesizer.