# 官方文档：Zookeeper Overview &  Getting Started Guide

> Distributed Systems / Zookeeper / 官方文档 / 入门

## Overview

https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/r3.6.1/zookeeperOver.html

ZooKeeper is a distributed, open-source coordination service for distributed applications.

提供一些primitives，让distributed applications 可以build upon，实现high level services for synchronization, configuration maintenance, and group and naming.

data model是类似文件系统树结构的。

设计目标：

- Simple: 
  - data like file system and in memory
  - high performance, highly available, strictly ordered access. The performance aspects of ZooKeeper means it can be used in large, distributed systems.
- replicated
- ordered (stamps each update with a number reflects the order, 可被用来实现synchronization primitives)
- fast. 尤其是read-dominant workloads.
  - ZooKeeper applications run on thousands of machines, and it performs best where reads are more common than writes, at ratios of around 10:1.

Data Model and the hierarchical namespace

### Nodes and ephemeral nodes

ZooKeeper was designed to store coordination data: status information, configuration, location information, etc., so **the data stored at each node is usually small**, in the byte to kilobyte range.

Znodes maintain a stat structure that includes **version numbers** for data changes, ACL changes, and **timestamps**, to allow **cache validations** and **coordinated updates**.

whenever a **client** retrieves data it **also receives the version of the data**.

Each node has an **Access Control List (ACL)** that restricts who can do what.

ephemeral nodes exists as long as **the session that created the znode is active.** When the session ends the znode is deleted.

### Conditional updates and watches

### Guarantees

ZooKeeper is very fast and very simple. Since its goal, though, is to be a basis for the construction of more complicated services, such as synchronization, it provides a set of guarantees. These are:

- Sequential Consistency - Updates from a client will be applied in the order that they were sent.
- Atomicity - Updates either succeed or fail. No partial results.
- Single System Image - A client will see the same view of the service regardless of the server that it connects to. i.e., a client will never see an older view of the system even if the client fails over to a different server with the same session.
- Reliability - Once an update has been applied, it will persist from that time forward until a client overwrites the update.
- Timeliness - The clients view of the system is guaranteed to be up-to-date within a certain time bound.

### Simple API

One of the design goals of ZooKeeper is providing a very simple programming interface. As a result, it supports only these operations:

- *create* : creates a node at a location in the tree
- *delete* : deletes a node
- *exists* : tests if a node exists at a location
- *get data* : reads the data from a node
- *set data* : writes data to a node
- *get children* : retrieves a list of children of a node
- *sync* : waits for data to be propagated

### Implementation

每一个ZooKeeper server都服务clients，clients连接到exactly one server，读请求直接被server的local database满足，写请求通过agreement protocol处理。

agreement protocol的部分说明：所有写请求都被forwarded到一个server叫leader，其他的servers叫followers，从leader接受消息，并agree upon message delivery. messaging layer负责替换失败的leader并同步followers with leaders.

ZooKeeper使用了一个custom atomic messaging protocol. Message layer 是atomic的，就能保证local replicas never diverge. Leader收到写请求时，会注意what the state of the system is when the write is to be applied并将其变为一个transaction。还不太懂。

## Getting Started

https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/r3.6.1/zookeeperStarted.html

### Zookeeper System Requirements

https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/r3.6.1/zookeeperAdmin.html#sc_systemReq

Zookeeper由若干components组成。

- Client，是java client library，用来连接到Zookeeper ensemble
- Server，是运行Zookeeper ensemble nodes的java server
- Native Client，是C实现的client，用来connect到Zookeeper ensemble
- Contrib，refers to multiple optional add-on components.

Zookeeper要求：

- Java release 1.8 or greater (JDK 8 LTS, JDK 11 LTS, JDK 12)
- runs as an ensemble of ZooKeeper servers
  - 3个server是一个ensemble的最小推荐值
  - At Yahoo!, ZooKeeper is usually deployed on dedicated RHEL boxes, with dual-core processors, 2GB of RAM, and 80GB IDE hard drives.

### Clustered (Multi-Server) Setup

### Single Server and Developer Setup

You can find the complete instructions in the [Installing and Running ZooKeeper in Single Server Mode](https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/r3.6.1/zookeeperStarted.html#sc_InstallingSingleMode) section of the [ZooKeeper Getting Started Guide](https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/r3.6.1/zookeeperStarted.html).

create it in **conf/zoo.cfg**:

```
tickTime=2000
dataDir=/var/lib/zookeeper
clientPort=2181
```

然后在windows上：

```
.\bin\zkServer.cmd
```

就跑起来了。

### Connecting to ZooKeeper

```
.\bin\zkCli.cmd -server 127.0.0.1:2181
```

### Programming to ZooKeeper

https://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/r3.6.1/zookeeperProgrammers.html#ch_programStructureWithExample

介绍了ZooKeeper的Data Model，ZNodes类型等。

### Running Replicated ZooKeeper

If you want to test multiple servers on a single machine, specify the `servername` as *localhost* with unique quorum & leader election ports (i.e. 2888:3888, 2889:3889, 2890:3890 in the example above) for each `server.X` in that server's config file. Of course separate `dataDir`s and distinct ` clientPort`s are also necessary (in the above replicated example, running on a single *localhost*, you would still have three config files).