# 【Paper】FlashMeta: A Framework for Inductive Program Synthesis

> Program Synthesis / Paper / PL / PBE / Programming-by-examples

- Programming-by-examples (Inductive Synthesis)
  - search-based synthesis
- Many PBE algorithms -> 
  - one generic meta-algorithm
  - the domain-specific properties of the operators in underlying DSL
- meta-algorithm 
  - propagates example-based constraints on an expression to its subexpressions, leveraging **associated witness functions**
  - witness functions:
    - inverse semantics of the underlying operator.
  - program synthesis methodology
    - **data-driven domain-specific deduction** (D4)
- FlashMeta:
  - generate an efficient synthesizer from the mere DSL definition
- Program Synthesis: a hard combinatorial search problem
  - because of the huge and arbitrary nature of the underlying state space of possible programs.
  - historically 3 ways:
    - **deductive synthesis:**
      - from **declarative and complete** logical specifications
      - success: well-defined application domains, such as numeric computations.
      - advantage: performance
      - disadvantage: manual effort:
        - axiomatize the application domain into a sound and complete system of deductive rules
        - difficult to write logical specifications
    - **Syntax-guided synthesis (SyGuS)**
      - parameterizes generic synthesis algorithms with DSL
      - requires a specification for behavior of programs
      - search over DSL (narrow down the space)
        - expressible in DSL
        - template from user
      - drawback:
        - cannot leverage any domain-specific insights for improving the performance
        - restricts the language of specifications to those expressible in some SMT theory
      - example:
        - CSS selectors (encoding semantics of DOM nodes, CSS, etc.)
    - **Domain-specific Inductive Synthesis**
      - specification in examples
      - examples:
        - FlashFill in Excel
        - FlashExtract in PowerShell
        - [Trifacta’s textual data transformation toolkit](http://www.trifacta.com/)
      - limitations (synthesizer):
        - developing the synthesis algorithm requires deep domain-specific insights
        - implementation: time-consuming
        - DSL hard to extend (small change in DSL -> More change in algorithm)
- This paper: Data-Driven Domain-Specific Deduction (D4)
  - unifies the strengths of deductive, syntax-guided, and domain-specific inductive approaches in one meta-algorithm.
- How this paper handle program synthesis problem — **3 dimensions**
  - intent specification
    - inductively (I/O examples)
    - We generalize it to properties of the output on specific input states? in order to enable effortless intent specification in complex scenarios
  - program space
    - syntax guided
    - our methodology also permits arbitrarily complex functional DSLs with rich domain-specific semantics, and enables scalable program synthesis for such DSLs
  - search strategy
    - based on deduction
    - based on witness functions, which propagate example-based specifications on a DSL operator down into specifications on the operator parameters
    - combine this **deductive inference** with **enumerative search**, a complementary **state-of-the-art approach** to program synthesis
    - deductive inference is performed using the standard algorithmic principle of **divide-and conquer**.
- **The key observation** that makes D4 scalable and usable is that many reduction logics for deducing specifications for simpler sub-problems depends only on the behavior of the involved operator on the concrete values in the original specification.
  - enable modularity (reduction logic depends only on the operator behavior)
  - domain expert can do that, no need for proficiency in program synthesis

- D4 as a Unification of Prior Work

- Section 4: **Version Space Algebra**
  - succinctly representing such a huge number of programs in polynomial space
  - intuitively, VSA can be viewed as **a directed graph where each node represents a set of programs.**
  - leaf node: direct set of programs
  - internal (constructor) nodes:
    - union VSA node: a set-theoretic union
    - join VSA node: with k children VSAs is annotated with a k-ary DSL operator F, and it represents a
      cross product of all possible applications of F to k parameter programs, independently chosen from the children VSAs.
  - Let $N$ be a symbol in a DSL. A version space algebra is a representation for a set $\tilde{N}$ of programs rooted at $N$.
  - $|\tilde{N}|$ size of $\tilde{N}$: number of programs
  - $W(\tilde{N})$ width of $\tilde{N}$: maximum number of children in any constructor node of $\tilde{N}$
  - $V(\tilde{N})$ volume of $\tilde{N}$: number of nodes in $\tilde{N}$
  - three operations over VSAs: **intersection, ranking, clustering**. related theorems: see paper.
    - intersection: unification of two sets of candidate programs that are **consistent with two different specifications.**
      - An efficient algorithm for VSA intersection **follows the ideas of automata intersection.**
    - ranking: $Top_h(\tilde{N},k)$, $h$ is a ranking function. 
      - $select$ top $k$ elements in $P_1, P_2, ...P_n$，
        - $O(m+k \log k)$ Hoare's `quickselect` algorithm，
        - $O(m\log k)$ using Heap
    - clustering: Clustering of a VSA partitions it into subsets of programs that are semantically indistinguishable w.r.t. the given input state $\sigma$, i.e. they **give the same output on $\sigma$​.**
      - for example: filter out the programs in $\tilde{N}$ that are inconsistent with a given specification

## Discussion

- Strengths and Limitations
  - **Decidability**
    -  A majority of the DSL should be characterized by witness functions, capturing a subset of inverse semantics of the DSL operators.
    - counterexample: finding roots of a multivariate integral polynomial
  - **Deduction**
    - Witness functions should not introduce many disjunctions. Each disjunct (assuming it can be materialized by at least one program) starts a new deduction branch. In certain domains this problem can only be efficiently solved with a corresponding SMT solver.
    - counterexample: BitOr
  - **Performance**
    - Witness functions should be efficient, preferably polynomial in low degrees over the specification size.
    - counterexample: factoring an integer

- D4 is the only synthesis strategy when **the following (also real-life) conditions hold**:
  - The DSL contains arbitrary executable operators that manipulate domain-specific objects with rich semantics.
  - The programs may contain domain-specific constants.
  - The specifications are inherently ambiguous, and resolving user’s intent requires learning a set of valid programs to enable ranking or additional user interaction.
  - The engineering & maintenance cost of a PBE-based tool is limited.
- Remarks: VSA as a language

## Related Work

- Sketch
  - input: partial program
  - translate to SAT encoding
  - applies counterexample-guided inductive synthesis to fill the holes
- Rosette
  - DSL-parameterized framework, supports verification, synthesis, repair
  - input: subset of racket programming language
  - translate to SMT constraints via symbolic execution
- Both SKETCH and ROSETTE allow seamless translation of their input languages (custom C-like in SKETCH or limited Racket in ROSETTE) to SAT/SMT encoding at runtime.
- Syntax-guided synthesis
  - SyGuS
    - standardize the input specification language (based on SMT theories) of program synthesis problems;
    - develop general-purpose synthesis algorithms for these problems, 
    - standardized benchmark suite.
  - SyGuS Algorithms: enumerative search, constraint-based search, stochastic search
- **Deduction for ADT Transformations**
  - Feser et al. and Osera and Zdancewicoperate: operate over languages with ADT processing operators and limited forms of recursion.
  - What is ADT Transformations?