# LLVM 官方文档: Writing an LLVM Pass

> LLVM / PL / Pass / Compiler

整理自：https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html

## Introduction: What is a pass?

- LLVM passes are where most of the interesting parts of the compiler exist.

- Passes perform the transformations and optimizations that make up the compiler.

- All LLVM passes are subclasses of the [Pass](https://llvm.org/doxygen/classllvm_1_1Pass.html) class, which implement functionality by overriding virtual methods inherited from `Pass`.
- Depending on how your pass works, you should inherit from the [ModulePass](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-modulepass) , [CallGraphSCCPass](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-callgraphsccpass), [FunctionPass](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-functionpass) , or [LoopPass](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-looppass), or [RegionPass](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-regionpass) classes.
- it schedules passes to run in an efficient way based on the constraints that your pass meets (which are indicated by which class they derive from).

## Quick Start: Writing hello world

Print out the name of non-external functions that exist in the program being compiled.

Can be found in the `lib/Transforms/Hello` directory.

### Setting up the build environment

介绍的是创建 lib/Transforms/Hello 文件夹（在LLVM source base内）的做法：

copy the following into `CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake
add_llvm_library( LLVMHello MODULE
  Hello.cpp

  PLUGIN_TOOL
  opt
  )
```

and the following line into `lib/Transforms/CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake
add_subdirectory(Hello)
```

### Basic Code Required

 Start out with:

```c++
#include "llvm/Pass.h"
#include "llvm/IR/Function.h"
#include "llvm/Support/raw_ostream.h"
```

Which are needed because we are：

- writing a [Pass](https://llvm.org/doxygen/classllvm_1_1Pass.html), 
- operating on [Function](https://llvm.org/doxygen/classllvm_1_1Function.html)s, 
- will be doing some printing.

next, use `using namespace llvm;` , the functions from the include files live in the llvm namespace.

接着用`namespace {` 开始一个匿名namespace。Anonymous namespaces are to C++ what the “`static`” keyword is to C (at global scope). It makes the things declared inside of the anonymous namespace visible only to the current file. 使得static全局变量局部可见。

接着，声明pass:

```c++
struct Hello : public FunctionPass {
```

Hello作为FunctionPass的子类。`FunctionPass` operates on a function at a time.

```c++
static char ID;
Hello() : FunctionPass(ID) {}
```

声明pass identifier (被LLVM用来identify pass)。这使得LLVM能够避免使用expensive C++ runtime information.

```c++
	bool runOnFunction(Function &F) override {
		errs() << "Hello: ";
		errs().write_escaped(F.getName()) << '\n';
		return false;
	}
}; //struct Hello结束
} //匿名namespace结束
```

`char Hello::ID = 0;` 初始化ID。LLVM使用ID的地址来identify一个pass，所以初始值无所谓。

```c++
static RegisterPass<Hello> X("hello", "Hello World Pass",
                             false /* Only looks at CFG */,
                             false /* Analysis Pass */);
```

最后，注册Hello这个类，给一个命令行参数hello，名称 "Hello World Pass"，然后是两个描述行为的参数：是只看CFG而不修改，第三个参数为true；如果是一个analysis pass比如dominator tree pass，第四个参数是true。

If we want to register the pass as a step of an existing pipeline, some extension points are provided, e.g. `PassManagerBuilder::EP_EarlyAsPossible` to apply our pass before any optimization, or `PassManagerBuilder::EP_FullLinkTimeOptimizationLast` to apply it after Link Time Optimizations.

编译后得到一个lib/LLVMHello.so，里面所有的东西都在一个匿名namespace里。passes不需要暴露外部接口就可以be useful。

### Running a pass with opt

```bash
$ opt -load lib/LLVMHello.so -hello < hello.bc > /dev/null
Hello: __main
Hello: puts
Hello: main
```

The [`-load`](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/opt.html#cmdoption-opt-load) option specifies that **opt** should load your pass as a shared object, which makes “`-hello`” a valid command line argument (which is one reason you need to [register your pass](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-registration)).

要查看都有什么选项，`$ opt -load lib/LLVMHello.so -help`

Pass执行时间：The [PassManager](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-passmanager) provides a nice command line option ([`-time-passes`](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/opt.html#cmdoption-opt-time-passes)) that allows you to get information about the execution time of your pass along with the other passes you queue up.

## Pass Classes and requirements

https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#pass-classes-and-requirements

When choosing a superclass for your `Pass`, you should choose the **most specific** class possible, while still being able to meet the requirements listed.

各种Pass略。

 **`FunctionPass` subclasses are not allowed to:**

1. Inspect or modify a `Function` other than the one currently being processed.
2. Add or remove `Function`s from the current `Module`.
3. Add or remove global variables from the current `Module`.
4. Maintain state across invocations of [runOnFunction](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#writing-an-llvm-pass-runonfunction) (including global data).

### Pass registration

how and why passes are registered?

passes are registered with the `RegisterPass` template. The template parameter is the name of the pass that is to be used on the command line to specify that the pass should be added to a program (for example, with **opt** or **bugpoint**).

If you want your pass to be easily dumpable, you should implement the virtual print method:

```c++
virtual void print(llvm::raw_ostream &O, const Module *M) const;
```

[Specifying interactions between passes](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#id34)

[Implementing Analysis Groups](https://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html#id40)

## Pass Statistics

PassManager主要干的两件事：

- **Share analysis results.**
- **Pipeline the execution of passes on the program.**

The `PassManager` class exposes a `--debug-pass` command line options that is useful for debugging pass execution, seeing how things work, and diagnosing when you should be preserving more analyses than you currently are. (To get information about all of the variants of the `--debug-pass` option, just type “`opt -help-hidden`”).

```bash
$ opt -load lib/LLVMHello.so -gvn -hello -licm --debug-pass=Structure < hello.bc > /dev/null
Pass Arguments:  -gvn -hello -licm
ModulePass Manager
  FunctionPass Manager
    Dominator Tree Construction
    Basic Alias Analysis (stateless AA impl)
    Function Alias Analysis Results
    Memory Dependence Analysis
    Global Value Numbering
    Hello World Pass
    Natural Loop Information
    Canonicalize natural loops
    Loop-Closed SSA Form Pass
    Basic Alias Analysis (stateless AA impl)
    Function Alias Analysis Results
    Scalar Evolution Analysis
    Loop Pass Manager
      Loop Invariant Code Motion
    Module Verifier
  Bitcode Writer
Hello: __main
Hello: puts
Hello: main
```

